Introduction to R (1st part)
================
Andreas Kitsche

R is a language and environment for statistical computing and graphics. R is available as Free Software. It compiles and runs on a wide variety of UNIX platforms and similar systems, Windows and MacOS.

Installation of R
-----------------

R can be downloaded from <http://www.r-project.org/>. A manual *R Installation and Administration* is also available on this website. Also the manual *An Introduction to R* can be found there.
We recommend the use of an editor. The use of an editor interface to R gives additional functionality. There are several editors available for R, e.g.:

-   Emacs
-   Tinn-R
-   WinEdt
-   R-Studio

For this introductory course we will use the R-Studio editor which is available under <http://rstudio.org/>. A very fine documentation on how to use R-Studio is given on <http://rstudio.org/docs/>.

Recording your work: we prefer to keep a record of the commands you entered, so that you can reproduce the workspace at a later date. You can find some introductory material for R on the following link

-   John Verzani: simpleR - [Using R for Introductory Statistics](http://cran.r-project.org/doc/contrib/Verzani-SimpleR.pdf)
-   Emmanuel Paradis: [R for Beginners](http://cran.r-project.org/doc/contrib/Paradis-rdebuts_en.pdf)
-   Tom Short: [R Reference Card](http://cran.r-project.org/doc/contrib/Short-refcard.pdf)

Using R as a calculator
-----------------------

At its basic level, R can be viewed as a fancy calculator.

``` chunk1
2 + 2
3^4
7 * 4 + 3
```

R has a workspace known as the global environment that can be used to store the results of calculations and many other types of objects. We tell R to make the assignment using an arrow that points to the left. We can see the results of this assignment by typing the name of our new object.

``` chunk2
object1 <- 72^9 + 10
object1
```

Types of data
-------------

There are several types of data implemented in R. You can check the type of an object with the `mode()` command:

``` chunk3
mode(object1)
```

The simplest types are logical values which are represented by `TRUE`TRUE and `FALSE`. The next higher ordered type of data are integer values. Integer values can be generated via the `as.integer()` function:

``` chunk4
mode(3.245) #obviously 3.245 is of type "numeric"
as.integer(3.245) #transforms the numeric value of "3.245" into an integer one
```

The next higher ordered type of data are numeric variables, i.e. 3.245. Another type of data are character data that consists of letters and strings:

``` chunk5
"hello, how are you?"
mode("hello, how are you?")
```

A numeric vector is a list of numbers. The `c()` function is used to collect things together into a vector. We can type

``` chunk6
c(4,9,12)
```

Again, we ca assign this to a named object

``` chunk7
object2 <- c(4,9,12) # the "#" sign can be used to commend lines
object2
```

The : symbol can be used to create sequences of values. For example,

``` chunk7
object3 <- 10:20
object3
```

Extracting elements from a vector is possible by using square brackets:

``` chunk8
object3[5] #extracts the 5th element from object3
```

Negative indices can be used to avoid certain elements.

``` chunik9
object3[-5] #selects all but the 5th element of object3
```

Also arithmetic can be done on R vectors. The computation is performed element-wise.

``` chunk10
object3 * 3 #multiply all elements of object3 with 3
```

Vector arithmetics also work element-by-element when applied to pairs of vectors. When the vectors are of different length, the shorter one is extended by recycling: values are repeated, starting at the beginning.

``` chunk11
object2
object3
object2 + object3
```

Patterned vectors can also be produced using the `seq()` function as well as the `rep()` function.

``` chunk12
seq(5, 15, by=2)
rep(1, 10)
```

The missing value symbol is `NA`. Missing values often arise in real data problems, but they can also arise because of the way calculations are performed.

``` chunk13
object3[20]
```

Note that there is a second kind of "missing" values which are produced by numerical computation, the so called "Not a Number", `NaN`, values.

``` chunk14
0/0
```

R also allows manipulation of logical quantities. The elements of a logical vectors can have the values `TRUE, FALSE` and `NA`. Logical vector are generated by conditions. For example:

``` chunk15
object3
object3 < 15
```

Logical operators are `<,<=,>,>=,==` for exact equality and `!=` for inequality. In addition if `c1` and `c2` are logical expressions, then `c1 & c2` is their intersection (`` and''), `c1|c2` is their union ( ``or'').

``` chunk16
(object3 <= 13) & (object3 <=17)
(object3 <= 13) | (object3 <=17)
```

Scalars and vectors can also be made of strings of characters instead of numbers. All elements of a vector must be of the same type.

``` chunk17
colors <- c("red", "green", "blue")
colors
```

Factors offer an alternative way of storing character data. For example a factor with six elements and having two levels:

``` chunk18
object4 <- rep(c("control","treatment"),3)
object4
factor(object4)
```

A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers, symbols, or expressions. In fact, matrices are multi-dimensional generalizations of vectors. To arrange values into a matrix, we use the `matrix()` function:

``` chunk19
matrix1 <- matrix(1:16, nrow=4, ncol=4)
matrix1
```

Matrices can be indexed by two indices:

``` chunk20
matrix1[1,3]
```

Whole rows ore columns of matrices may be selected by leaving the corresponding index blank:

``` chunk21
matrix1[2,]
matrix1[,1]
```

Data frames are matrix-like structures, with the columns having their own names. Columns can be of different types from each other. Most data sets are stored in R as data frames. Think of data frames as "data matrices" with one row per observational unit. Use the `data.frame` function to construct data frames from vectors:

``` chunk22
colors2 <- c("red","blue","yellow","green")
numbers <- 1:4
type <- c("1st","2nd","3rd",NA)
object5 <- data.frame(colors2, numbers, type)
object5
```

Around 100 datasets are supplied with R. To see the list of datasets currently available use

``` chunk23
data()
```

Using the function `str()` compactly display the internal structure of an R object:

``` chunk24
str(object5)
```

Indexing a data frame is just like indexing a matrix:

``` chunk25
object5[2,]
```

Due to the fact that the columns of a data frame have their own name you can also use the `$` operator to select elements of a data frame:

``` chunk26
object5$colors2
object5$colors2[2]
```

Sometimes you may wish to select a partial quantity of a given data set then the `subset()` function is an appropriate choice. It returns subsets of data frames which meet conditions:

``` chunk27
data(iris)
subset(iris, Species == "setosa")
subset(iris, Species == "setosa", select=c("Sepal.Length","Sepal.Width"))
```

All R functions and datasets are stored in packages. Only when a package is loaded are its contents available. This is done both for efficiency (the full list would take more memory and would take longer to search than a subset), and to aid package developers, who are protected from name clashes with other code. To see which packages are installed at your site, issue the command

``` chunk28
library()
```

with no arguments. To load a particular package use a command like

``` chunk29
library(multcomp)
```

Users connected to the Internet can use the `install.packages()` and `update.packages()` functions to install and update packages. To see which packages are currently loaded, use

``` chunk30
search()
```

The standard (or base) packages are considered part of the R source code. They contain the basic functions that allow R to work, and the datasets and standard statistical and graphical functions. There are many functions in R which are designed to do all sorts of things. R has an inbuilt help facility to get more information on any specific named function, for example `seq()`: A useful supplement to `help()` is the `example` function:

``` chunk31
example(seq)
```

You can also use `help.search()` when you do not know the function name. Another function that is often used is the `help.search()`:

``` chunk32
help.search("se")
```
